Adding onboarding docs and configuring live preview (#5333)
ROCm/rocm-libraries: projects/hipdnn/docs/user-guides/how-to/develop-plugins.rst

.. meta::
  :description: Learn how to develop plugins for hipDNN.
  :keywords: hipDNN, ROCm, plugins

.. _develop-plugins:

**************************
Develop plugins for hipDNN
**************************

> hipDNN supports a plugin architecture that allows for modular extensions to the framework. Plugins are designed to be separate projects that extend hipDNN's capabilities without being part of the core repository.

Reviewer: don't make hipDNN possessive

> hipDNN supports a plugin architecture that allows for modular extensions to the framework. Plugins are designed to be separate projects that extend hipDNN's capabilities without being part of the core repository.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
hipDNN supports a plugin architecture that allows for modular extensions to the framework. Plugins are designed to be separate projects that extend the hipDNN capabilities without being part of the core repository.
```

> The backend discovers and manages these plugins, leveraging them for different aspects of deep learning routines. This architecture provides flexibility in implementation choices and enables optimizations for specific hardware or use cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The backend discovers and manages these plugins, leveraging them across different aspects of deep learning routines. This architecture provides flexibility in implementation choices and enables optimizations for specific hardware or use cases.
```

.. important::

>   This page is for advanced users such as senior developers, engineers, and system administrators who are looking to extend hipDNN with customized plugins. Most users should use the default plugins described in :ref:`build-execute`.

Reviewer: Do we need warnings that they can mess up their systems with poorly developed plugins?

Author: This may be unnecessary, but what do you think @CMiservaAMD ?

Reviewer 3: I think there is at least one scenario where a user could unwittingly break things with a custom plugin. I added a note to this page describing that in https://github.com/ROCm/rocm-libraries/pull/5638.

>   This page is for advanced users such as senior developers, engineers, and system administrators who are looking to extend hipDNN with customized plugins. Most users should use the default plugins described in :ref:`build-execute`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This topic is for advanced users such as senior developers, engineers, and system administrators who are looking to extend hipDNN with custom plugins. Most users should use the default plugins described in :ref:`build-execute`.
```

> It's recommended that you review the :ref:`architecture` and :ref:`backend-architecture` documents for context before beginning plugin development.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Review the :ref:`architecture` and :ref:`backend-architecture` topics for context before beginning plugin development.
```

Plugin types
============

> Kernel engine plugins provide the actual kernel implementations for operations. They contain the compute kernels that execute on the target hardware (GPUs, accelerators, and so on).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kernel engine plugins provide the actual kernel implementations for operations. They contain the compute kernels that execute on the target hardware (GPUs).
```

Reviewer: we don't use "accelerator" any more

SDK libraries
=============

hipDNN provides several C++ SDK libraries for plugin development.

> Data SDK (``data_sdk``)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Data SDK (data_sdk)
```

-----------------------

The Data SDK contains the FlatBuffers schemas and data structures for graph representation. It includes:

- FlatBuffers schema definitions for graphs, nodes, and attributes.
- Data structures for deserializing serialized graphs.
- Utilities for working with graph data.

> Plugin SDK (``plugin_sdk``)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Plugin SDK (plugin_sdk)
```

---------------------------

The Plugin SDK contains the plugin API and utilities needed to create a plugin that hipDNN can consume. It includes:

- Plugin interface definitions.
- Base classes for engine implementation.
- Utilities for plugin development.

> Test SDK (``test_sdk``)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Test SDK (test_sdk)
```

-----------------------

The Test SDK provides utilities for testing plugins. It includes:

> - `CPU reference implementation <https://github.com/ROCm/rocm-libraries/blob/develop/projects/hipdnn/docs/OperationSupport-ReferenceImpl.md>`_ for validation (convolution, batchnorm, etc.). This implementation:

Reviewer 2: Check whether Convolution and Batchnorm are capitalized (they are below)

  - Provides ground-truth results for validating GPU implementations.
  - Supports core operations (Convolution, Batchnorm, Pointwise).
  - Isn't intended for performance or production use.

- Test utilities (tolerances, seeds, logging).
- Mock objects for unit testing.
- FlatBuffer test utilities.

Plugin API
==========

The plugin API defines how kernel engine plugins interact with hipDNN:

- **Graph Processing**: Topologically sorted graphs are passed in a serialized format to plugins using FlatBuffers.
- **Data SDK Objects**: Plugins use Data SDK objects to deserialize and process graphs.
- **Capability Reporting**: Plugins analyze graphs and report whether they can execute them.
- **Execution Interface**: Plugins provide execution methods for supported operations.

Engine IDs
==========

> Every engine used by hipDNN requires a unique engine ID. Plugins that provide more than one engine must have a unique ID for each engine provided by the plugin.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Every engine used by hipDNN requires a unique engine ID. Plugins that provide more than one engine must have a unique ID for each engine.
```

Reviewer: agree

hipDNN uses a deterministic hash-based system for managing engine IDs. This system converts human-readable engine names to unique ``int64_t`` identifiers.
The engine ID system ensures globally unique identifiers across all plugins.

> When creating a new engine, select a unique descriptive name for the new engine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When creating a new engine, select a unique descriptive name.
```

During development, add the ``HIPDNN_REGISTER_ENGINE(MY_NEW_ENGINE, "MY_NEW_ENGINE")`` macro to a source file in your project.
This registers the name globally (verifying that it doesn't conflict with plugin names from the official distribution) and creates variables that can be used to retrieve the unique ID for this engine.

Here's the workflow:

1. **Engine Names**: Define human-readable string names for your engines (for example, ``MY_CUSTOM_ENGINE``).
2. **Hash Function**: The ``hipdnn_plugin_sdk::engine_names::engineNameToId()`` function converts names to IDs using a FNV-1a hash algorithm.
3. **Registration**: Engine names are registered with the Plugin SDK for discoverability.

Benefits
--------

- **Deterministic**: Same name always produces same ID.
- **No Collisions**: Hash algorithm minimizes collision risk.
- **Human-Readable**: Debug logs can show meaningful engine names.
- **Forward Compatible**: New engines can be used without registry updates.

Use Engine IDs
--------------

> 

Reviewer 2: Consider an introductory statement here.

.. code:: cpp

  #include <hipdnn_data_sdk/utilities/EngineNames.hpp>

  // This macro registers the engine name and creates helper variables
  // such as EXAMPLE_PLUGIN_RELU_ENGINE_ID for this engine.
  HIPDNN_REGISTER_ENGINE(MY_CUSTOM_ENGINE, "MY_CUSTOM_ENGINE")

  class MyCustomEngine : public hipdnn_plugin_sdk::IEngine< ... >
  {
  public:
      explicit MyCustomEngine(int64_t id);

  private:
      int64_t _id;
  };
  ...
  auto engine = std::make_unique<MyCustomEngine>(EXAMPLE_PLUGIN_RELU_ENGINE_ID);

Register new engine names
----------------------------

To add your engine name to the official registry, submit a GitHub pull request to add your engine name to `plugin_sdk/include/hipdnn_plugin_sdk/EngineNames.hpp <https://github.com/ROCm/rocm-libraries/blob/develop/projects/hipdnn/data_sdk/include/hipdnn_data_sdk/utilities/EngineNames.hpp>`_ in this format:

.. code:: cpp

  HIPDNN_REGISTER_ENGINE(MY_CUSTOM_ENGINE, "MY_CUSTOM_ENGINE")

> Test it locally. You can use unregistered names during development, but you'll need to remove the ``HIPDNN_REGISTER_ENGINE()`` macro from your plugin before it's added to the official registry as the duplicated registries will be interpreted as an engine ID collision error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Test it locally. You can use unregistered names during development, but you'll need to remove the ``HIPDNN_REGISTER_ENGINE()`` macro from your plugin before it's added to the official registry, as duplicated registries are interpreted as an engine ID collision error.
```

   2. Add definitions for the plugin interface defined in `plugin_sdk/include/hipdnn_plugin_sdk/EnginePluginApi.h <https://github.com/ROCm/rocm-libraries/blob/develop/projects/hipdnn/plugin_sdk/include/hipdnn_plugin_sdk/EnginePluginApi.h>`_. See :ref:`miopen` for an implementation reference.

2. Implement the plugin API functions.

   The underlying implementation below the plugin API level is entirely at the developer's discretion. While the following architectural components are recommended for code organization and maintainability, the only true requirement is to implement the exported API functions defined in ``engine_plugin_api.h``. However, the common architectural pattern consists of:

   - **Engine manager**: Manages available engines and their capabilities.
   - **Engine**: Implements graph execution for specific operations (each engine must have a globally unique ``int64_t`` ID).
   - **Execution plans**: Define how operations are executed.
   - **Engine name and ID**: Name your engine and place it in the EngineNames registry

3. Build and deploy the plugin.

   - Configure CMake to build the plugin as a shared library.

>    - Install it to the ROCm hipDNN plugin directory where hipDNN can discover it at runtime or use the ``HIPDNN_PLUGIN_DIR`` environment variable to force hipDNN to only load plugins from the folder specified in the environment variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Install it in the ROCm hipDNN plugin directory where hipDNN can discover it at runtime, or use the ``HIPDNN_PLUGIN_DIR`` environment variable to force hipDNN to only load plugins from the folder specified in the environment variable.
```

      └── engines/
          └── your_plugin.so

Install your plugin to this folder to have it included automatically by hipDNN. Note that if the ``HIPDNN_PLUGIN_DIR`` environment variable is set, the plugins will only be loaded from that folder and not the ROCm folder.

Plugin loading
==============

hipDNN supports dynamic plugin loading with configurable search paths.

Default plugin loading
----------------------

By default, hipDNN loads plugins from ``./hipdnn_plugins/engines/``.
This path is relative to the backend shared library location, typically: ``/opt/rocm/lib/``.

Default structure example:

.. code::

  /opt/rocm/lib/
  └── hipdnn_plugins/
      └── engines/
          ├── miopen_plugin.so
          └── other_plugin.so

Environment variable override
------------------------------

You can override the default plugin directory using the ``HIPDNN_PLUGIN_DIR`` environment variable. This is particularly useful for testing and development:

.. code:: bash

  # Load plugins from a custom directory
  export HIPDNN_PLUGIN_DIR=/path/to/test/plugins

  # Example: Load test plugins during testing
  export HIPDNN_PLUGIN_DIR=/home/user/hipDNN/build/lib/test_plugins

> When ``HIPDNN_PLUGIN_DIR`` is set, hipDNN will *only* load plugins from the specified directory and supplementary custom paths, ignoring the default location. This allows complete control over which plugins are loaded, which is essential for:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When ``HIPDNN_PLUGIN_DIR`` is set, hipDNN will only load plugins from the specified directory and supplementary custom paths, ignoring the default location. This allows complete control over which plugins are loaded, which is essential for:
```

  - Enable tests for all supported ASICs.
  - A GPU is typically required for meaningful validation; use the ``SKIP_IF_NO_DEVICE()`` macro to automatically skip the test if no HIP devices are found.
  - Tests are divided into two categories described by the prefix argument passed to ``INSTANTIATE_TEST_SUITE_P``.

    - **Smoke** - These tests are designed to test features using the smallest possible shape and run quickly (combined smoke test run time must be under 5 mins).
    - **Full** - These tests can contain regression shapes, large shapes, or slow shapes.

For a comprehensive example of an integration test, see `IntegrationGpuBatchnormForwardInference.cpp <https://github.com/ROCm/rocm-libraries/blob/develop/dnn-providers/miopen-provider/integration_tests/IntegrationGpuBatchnormForwardInference.cpp>`_.

.. important::

  See our `general testing requirements <https://github.com/ROCm/rocm-libraries/blob/develop/dnn-providers/miopen-provider/integration_tests/IntegrationGpuBatchnormForwardInference.cpp>`_.

Example: MIOpen Provider Plugin
================================

See :ref:`miopen` for more information.

Troubleshooting

> ===============

Reviewer 2: Nested heading. Try to avoid if possible.

Plugin loading failures
-----------------------

When a plugin fails to load or initialize, hipDNN logs an error and continues loading other plugins. Common issues include the following.

Plugin handle creation fails
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you see errors like ``"Failed to create handle for plugin 'PluginName'"``, this typically indicates:

- Missing dependencies that the plugin requires at runtime.
- GPU initialization failures (e.g., no compatible device found).
- Plugin internal initialization errors.

**Solution**: Check that all plugin dependencies are satisfied, library load paths are set correctly, and a compatible GPU device is available.

Null handle returned
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you see ``"Plugin 'PluginName' returned null handle"``, the plugin's ``hipdnnEnginePluginCreate`` function returned a null pointer without throwing an exception.

**Solution**: Review the plugin's handle creation logic to ensure it either returns a valid handle or throws an exception with a meaningful error message.

Symbol collisions between plugins
---------------------------------

> When multiple plugins are loaded and one or more plugins don't properly hide their symbols, you may encounter:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When multiple plugins are loaded and one or more plugins don't properly hide their symbols, you might encounter one of these issues:
```

- Crashes or undefined behavior during plugin operations.

This occurs because dynamically loaded shared libraries can inadvertently share symbols, causing one plugin's function to override another plugin's function.
If the plugin loads successfully in isolation, then this may be the issue.

Example error log
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code::

  [ERROR] Plugin 'my_plugin' returned a handle that collides with another plugin.
          This may indicate a symbol collision between plugins.
          Ensure all plugins are built with -fvisibility=hidden.

Solution
~~~~~~~~

All plugins must be built with symbol visibility hidden to prevent symbol collisions:

1. Add this code to your plugin's ``CMakeLists.txt``:

   .. code:: cmake

     set(CMAKE_CXX_VISIBILITY_PRESET hidden)
     set(CMAKE_VISIBILITY_INLINES_HIDDEN ON)

   Alternatively, add ``-fvisibility=hidden`` to your compiler flags:

   .. code:: cmake

     target_compile_options(your_plugin PRIVATE -fvisibility=hidden)

2. Only export the required plugin API symbols. The plugin SDK macros handle this automatically when visibility is hidden by default.

Verification
~~~~~~~~~~~~

> To verify your plugin has proper symbol visibility:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To verify your plugin has proper symbol visibility, run the following:
```
